Dory. Good morning and welcome to ask Dr Doreen Im Shannon Penrod and Dr Doreen. Grampy Shea is here with us good morning good morning Im  excited to be here with you this morning uh and were were. Live  now I should say that it is Tuesday December th and Dr Grampy Shea is live  now because I know many of. You watch and you want to know when were live as opposed to reruns but were live live live  now in fact. Were saying good morning to Liliana and to Renee and Elvira uh  thrilled that. You guys are here with us  Dr Grampy Shay good morning good morning Shannon good morning everyone its lovely to be. Here  its lovely to be here with you and for those of you who dont know Dr Grampy Shay is a true expert in the field of autism shes been working in. This field for more than  years I  that that  it doesnt make sense its never made sense to me and every. Time it gets a little bit more it makes less sense to me but shes been working in the field for more than  I said. Four zero years working with all kinds of individuals on the autism spectrum from  young babies up through senior. Citizens and everything in between at all different levels I find her  remarkable and somewhat of a. Unicorn in that while she is a a behaviorist you know youre a PhD bcbad. And I get all the letters in there um but she also uh and I think sort of. It makes great sense to me but I think it is you are a unicorn that you are a humanitarian  thank you in that. Youre always doing perspective taking about what it is  for the individuals on the Spectrum  what. It is  for the people who love them around them and supporting all of them you have been for years way before it. Was the popular thing been at the Forefront of saying if youre going to work with someone on the Spectrum it has. To be worthwhile for them my favorite phrase that you say is it has to be fair fair yeah yeah um and that you know. Resonates  deeply with me as a parent um and I  you know you guys. Know if you watch the show know that my son is doing remarkably  and that I credit Dr Grampy Shea and her knowledge. And what you taught to the people who worked with him on a daytoday basis is the reason why my son is doing. Im her biggest fan I know some of you are  there with me  shoulder to shoulder with that but I. Know nobody loves her more than I do you know  your husband and your kids Ill Ill concede to them thank you. But we hope I think I know all of them and they do but uh were saying good. Morning to Susie B and were looking forward to seeing you later on today and. Uh were thrilled that you guys are here with us live we are live were taking your questions live  now on. Facebook YouTube Twitter and about a dozen other sites trayvons going to show those on the screen to you hes. Been showing them to you I want to remind all of you that um we love it when you subscribe and. There are different ways of subscribing if youre on the autism hyphen live site which is still  functional there is. A place there to subscribe to a mailing list the easier one the better one the. Faster one is when you are on autismnetworkcom there is a sick after youre on for about six seconds a popup. Pops up and you either have to exit or you know or you do decide that youre. Going to subscribe that instantly goes on to the mailing list the other one I have to do by hand oh I see it  then. Youre then youre having to deal with how slow I am but um then weve started the newsletters again we had suspended. Those during the pandemic but weve started the newsletters again and Im  proud of the fact that when you open our newsletters you get coupons. Codes for money off of some   toys Im in love with this Mosey. Thing you guys um because look you know you sit and hold hands with your kid and then you. Pass this back and forth oh how cool I am  ridiculously fond of this is fun. Yeah its better if youre closer to each other and then you can manipulate it a little more but  fun and you can. Play all kinds of games with this because it pops up into a ball and you can do all kinds of  with it uh. Trayvon and I had such a good time with this the other day and he was saying I dont know how to get it back to the thing and I said theres this moment. When you think itll never oh no its  the slinky gone awry and itll never go back and I said you know you. Stick your finger in and theres always a moment where you go its not going to work its not going to work and then it snaps that to me is sort of fascinating. But  um  I dont know how I got off what is this called thats called the mosey. And its its they say you  Mosey along with it Im gonna need one for my I know thats why thats why I got it. Out thats why I got it out uh and I have many other choice uh speaking of which you guys if you havent already if. Youre interested in toys and and you should get the newsletter because there it was theres a five percent off code. For this  now yeah and anything else that fun in motion toys does there. Was also a five percent code off of the um uh smart felt toys  which are great. For developing speech  all of those  are part and parcel of our toy. Guide which is available  now on the website if you go to autismnetworkcom click on the toy guide. If you hold down on that two  will happen if you if you hold down for a while itll take you directly to a site. Where you can choose all the age ranges or theres a drop down menu if you want to  you know that youre looking for. Something for a baby then you can  click on the baby and go there I always  to say to people  with the age. Of the the individual but then look in every other category because you know what category this is in its in the. Caregiver category oh interesting because I put it in um for the cat the caregiver sensory because its a way for. A caregiver to make a connection with their child but this could be in the school age category it could be between. Adult yeah  theres lots of toys  that that would fit in other categories  do look around and dont forget sad. That this Sunday is our th Annual sensitive Santa oh my gosh I know that. Came up fast I know its its  my favorite day of the year you guys and were working  hard here to get. Everything ready for those of you whove already registered weve got you and were  excited about you coming we. Hope that you arrive on time its at the Ed Asner Family Center and it is a drivethrough yeah. Um but you do have the choice this year to get out of your car and take a quick picture with Santa Claus thats socially. Distance nice and next year  we can do  in person thats what were hoping for I mean but were still an. Abundance of caution but if you have not gotten your tickets were almost sold out you guys but there are a few more. Tickets in a couple of different time ranges you want to go to Eventbrite and go to sensitive Santa event  and you. Will find us and then you can register the tickets are free but you cannot come without a ticket because we have to know. Whos coming of course for toys it gets  busy see the elves are hard. At work they are and I wish the cameras could see all the elves working over here yeah you know turban showed the the. He had a camera set up the other day  that it would show and I said you showed the mess I mean our studio and our. Offices are  packed with toys it looks  Santa has exploded but I love that hello Dark Angel and hello our. Journey Camerons new life were  glad that youre all here this morning  the topic the starting topic this morning is. Tantrums  which I know everybody is you know pretty common yeah yeah. Um and our first question this morning is help how do I deal with my sons Tantrums I feel  no matter what I do. Help How do I deal with my sons tantrums I feel  no matter what I do it is wrong in someones eyes I am terrified to go out anymore because I am afraid he will have a tantrum and I wont be able to know what to do. Its wrong in someones eyes Im terrified to go out anymore because Im afraid he will have a tantrum and I. Wont be able to know what to do yeah which I think is a lot of how weve all felt I thought  on a certain. Day yeah yeah and I often you know  now Im trying to write some  about how to deal with challenging behaviors. And I dont know prepare parents and I love the feedback and the opportunity   now to ask a lot of. Parents I dont know if its you know on the one hand I think a lot of parents  want to know  away  if I. Have a tantrum the Tantrum how do I deal with that yeah on the other hand I know a lot of parents  in general want to. Know  what is the basis of of dealing with all challenging behaviors  and I dont know which one is. Easier to explain its the same thing but  Ill  to kind of give a little bit of a general answer which  help. Will help with not  Tantrums but  help also with in general any. Behavior that has challenged any Behavior period   it starts with. The idea of everything we do has a purpose  when our child Tantrums its our job. To  to figure out what the purpose is and in ABA lingo we call that the. Function and it doesnt mean anything other than the purpose the reason why is. The child doing that and often when we do something its the purpose of it is. Because were trying to communicate something   I  you. Have that toy and I  want that toy now in order to get that toy I  hit. You I  grab it I  run up to Mom and cry I  Ill. Behavior I have all of those behaviors are not acceptable  except for me. Asking you  and waiting for you to share it  theres always an. Appropriate way to get what we want and then a whole bunch of not acceptable. Ways  and thats true of everyone its not  our kids its true of us  if we want lets say more. Attention from our spouse we  do a bunch of nonadaptive  you know. I dont know throw a fit at home demand their time be rude but. Or we  ask in a  good adaptive fashion  our job is to figure out when. Our kids do a certain Behavior why are they doing it and and I always  to use the the easier way for parents I. Think is to say if they had  good language and they had already learned. This how what would they be communicating instead of throwing the. Tantrum what would they be saying and it is always going to be. Some expression of something they want or dont want thats always the case. Believe me  its always going to be I want some object I want some activity I. Want some food I want your attention I want what he has I want something I want. To go to the bathroom I want to go to the bathroom I want medication because I have pain  I want to break I. Want to break thats  which I want to break starts us into the category of. I dont want which is I dont want to work anymore  I dont want to be doing this I dont want to have to. Answer your question I dont want to pay attention I dont want to stop selfstimulating I dont want  its. Always something I want or I dont want  and the hard part is not dealing. With the Tantrum the hard part is figuring out what is it theyre trying to communicate thats the hard part. Getting that function  is    vital and thats what all of ABA is. About with ABA you figure out what it is they want or dont want and then you. Teach them to use a more adaptive functional appropriate way of requesting. That thing and you do not allow the nonadaptive challenging way to win its. Its  that simple  when your child Tantrums  you figure out first of all what what they want and by. The way every tantrum is going to be a different thing  there the the thing. About it is that when our kids tantrum and they get in one scenario they get. What they want  for instance you  to get your child to hurry up and get ready and its time to go out and they. Have a tantrum and by tantruming theyre going getting ready and going out is delayed   they get out of  they. Get to avoid  if they could talk they would have said I dont want to go out I. Dont I  want to keep doing what Im doing and  they by tantruming theyve accomplished that now in their system in. Their mind that tantrum becomes a powerful Communicator  now theyve learned oh Im going from now on when I. Dont want something I will tantrum yeah and its going to work  be careful. Because every single time that your child Tantrums it could have a different function  they could be wanting to not. Go out they could be wanting to continue playing with this toy they could they could tantrum because theyre trying to. Get your attention because you havent been attending to them they could tantrum because they dont want to go to. School  it is  once youve figured out that function now the key. Part of it is to not allow them to receive that thing when they tantrum. But to allow them to receive that thing that they wanted when they ask in a more. Appropriate way and  that means if Im tantruming because I dont want to go to. School sorry Im going to get you ready and take you to school  but if you. Say Mom I  dont want to go to school today then I will   give you a break or  go with you or. Do I will respond to what it is that you  want if you ask for it. Im going to now take that down to the level of lets say a child whos not able to communicate. Lets say a young child a threeyearold cant  say I want that toy you. Have  now  theyre hitting you to grab that toy or theyre having a. Tantrum because they couldnt have that toy now its for us what we do as. Behaviorists is if theyre tantruming and we know its because they want that toy we do not give the toy when the. Child is tantruming instead we will prompt the child to say toy or to point. To the picture of a toy or even for nonvocal children to somehow indicate. In a more appropriate way that thats what they want and  they do the more appropriate behavior they get a lot. Of Kudos they get the toy they get a break they get all kinds of goodies and  they communicated a. Nonappropriate way or in a challenging way they do not get what it is they were asking for and that applies to pretty. Everything I want to break if they ask for  a break if they point to a. Icon of a break any any appropriate way of of asking for a break they get a. Break but if theyre tantruming and throwing a fit and all that sort of  no you continue to work through it. You  continue to work until the Tantrum subsides and the child says break and then you can give them a break. Thats how you deal with Tantrums now in this particular case I think the parents said  we go out yeah. Yeah and  you have to figure out what it is about going out it could be. Many different  it could be the place youre going that the child doesnt want to go to that place which. By the way its not  you always will have to avoid that place its  that you need to better prepare your child. For going to that place it could be they dont want to go in the car they dont. The car it could be they dont want to get ready it could be they dont want to give up what it is theyre giving up. In order to go out it could be a million different  but you have to figure that out without figuring that out. Youre not going to know what it is it could also be that theyre fine until you get to the. Place  its not  about going out its about something in that place  it could be overwhelming because its. Noisy its  stimulating and theres  many people theres lights and. Sounds you think about what it is thats the key to figuring out how to deal with. It and all of that is such good information but I think Renee and Elvira has  hit on the thing here they. Say during Tantrums slash meltdowns I get  emotional and overwhelmed and freeze calming myself first is big thing. For me and I think thats for a lot of us thats for all of us thats for all of us let me tell you I always make fun. During tantrumsmeltdowns I get  emotional and overwhelmed and freeze  calming myself first is big thing for me. Of this because you know Ive  been doing ABA and some form of Behavioral psychology my whole life pretty. On and it was pretty easy with my first child and my second child all of. This worked  that was my third child there was nothing on Earth that I. Could do to get this child sometimes to either calm down go to sleep  it. Is and believe me as a behaviorist whos been practicing and writing about this  forever I would sit outside her. Room crying because Id be  oh my God what am I doing wrong and  this is. A   normal thing which is why its helpful to have if you have access. To a bcba a boardcertified behavior analyst or someone with that level of experience and knowledge to sit down. With you and say I know youre you are emotional  now but the reason hes doing this is this and theres a lot of. Ways that bcbas we figure out what that function or purpose is yeah because you. We change the scenario multiple times and we realize is oh every time were. Going to Chuck E cheese he has some help down  its got to be something with Chuck E cheese we narrow it down and we. Figure out the appropriate purpose I you know I I dont want to say something. Thats you know blanket but I think there have been a lot of studies suggesting that parents of special needs. Kids have PTSD oh for sure and I I feel that a lot of us do and you know for me. Gem had a lot of Tantrums but the one the mother of all Tantrums that I remember the  was when we were at a. McDonalds yeah and it was one of those ones that had the play structure thing and I took him there and and he was. Going to get to be there for  a while it wasnt  he only got to be there for  minutes but it was one of those that I would be  anxious the. Whole time because he would be up in the tubes and you have no control yeah once theyre up in the tubes and you know. Youre gonna go in there after them  my fat took us in the you know I could    I was  oh my. Gosh Im gonna get stuck in there and theyre gonna have to call the parent addicts and you know my kid is good but but you know you worry about because I. Mean kids will bite other kids up there yeah you worry is your child going to do something to another child or is another. Child going to do something to you and sometimes theres older kids up there  everything under the sun  and. I would sit there and be watching through the tubes the whole time and be at a heightened place myself  and. Then I would  to give him the countdown and say  were leaving in five minutes you know and not. Um but he got to a point where he understood that he was in control yeah and that I and I could say you know. Youve got  seconds to come down and he you know he didnt have the ability to give me the finger but he. Did I mean yeah  and and  eventually he came down I dont know how. I lured him down but I said we have to leave  now and he through the mother of all Tantrums I had to pick him. Up he was clawing and biting and kicking and hitting and. I  remember going out the side door yeah and the entire place was staring at. Us and he was holding on to the door as I was trying to peel his fingers off as he was kicking me in the head uh you. Know I think I had him upside down carrying him to the car and and I felt. Two cents yeah I felt   I traumatized my child Im a bad parent oh. Everybody in there thinks Im a bad parent I dont have control I dont feel proficient and then I do I wouldnt I. The the terrible thing was that it was  you know I dont know that I ever brought him back to a McDonalds I. Think we went to other play structures but I went with a therapist yeah because I didnt  I understand this parent. Saying I dont want to go out because I   but I but I will tell. You that now and Im gonna get emotional in my life there came a point when I. Felt proficient enough I mean  now my son is  such a joy way in a treat to be around and I it never. Crosses my mind to be concerned about his behavior not ever ever of course but its been that way for years but I. Remember a time when he was  I dont know  or  where I realized oh Im no. Longer afraid that my child will have a tantrum yeah yeah and it was such a a. Relief and a release and I felt competent that if something happened  I see that in you that you know a. Child comes into your circle and and I see competence and that you know youre. Going to be able to handle it no matter what  but when youre in the thick of it oh God I know its  hard to know. I know will I ever be proficient enough that I feel confident with my child and. Thats devastating to opinion but Shannon thats the and believe me I know. This experience  I do know this experience and thats where my my the. Sentence that I always say that you quote  which is is it fair thats where that comes in because if the. Scenario is made fair for the child not only will the child be more manageable. And compliant but you wont feel   guilt about it the whole thing works when its fair and  a lot of times. We have to question our own rules which is kind of  you know I and we. Have  many of these rules you think about it  oh I have to go to. McDonalds because thats where people take their kids to play on the play structures thats not true that is not. True for your child that could  its not  the  place to go at that time hes not. Prepared  you have to do a bunch of preparation before you approach that. Theres     that you know   I think instead of  going there and having. That kind of an experience where it becomes  traumatic my recommendation. Is to   to do this in steps in  small steps where you can make sure. That you go out to a location get help first of all be prepared read as  as. You can about how to manage these types of behaviors always think in terms of your what is your child thinking. Now  and this is another thing any other child would also have a problem with leaving a preferred any other child. But theres a difference the difference is when you tell the other child hey. Were going to come back tomorrow  they have a concept of that they have a concept of oh were coming back at some. Future point and they also have this desire to not make you  mad yeah and. Our kids dont  recognize oh what Im doing doing  now is going to  upset my mom and they also. Dont have the concept of time if there was a way where you could give your child a timer and that said when this. Timer goes off  be back here I promise you every child has the capacity to wait they  dont they think. Youre taking them away forever yeah and also the other part of it is they become. Hyper stimulated to the point where they cant control themselves theyve now. Lost all control because and I was already in a state and youre already in this thing because I was worried the. Whole time but I think that one of the  that  helped me that you. Guys did for me was that you gave me a job during the Tantrum yeah and and my. You gave me    drop down menus to be thinking about  you know that the first thing when he would. To throw  first of all you gave me a job before if I saw it  to escalate or there was   control in that. Yeah that I that I had  that you you guys had given me that I could choose from to say that  you know to. Ask myself the question what is it I think is going on  here is there anything extra going on what do I think. He wants is there a way that I can prompt him to ask for it appropriately   all of these  that I. Could do when I saw it give it to him  what will happen even the preparation of what will happen when. This activity has to end  how am I going to manage that  oh  and to have something to say you know. Not  say  I need you to come down in five minutes but to say  we got five minutes and then were gonna go. Do and have that be a preferred activity  that he was willing to disengage that fair thing but but then if the Tantrum. If we got to the Tantrum and the Tantrum happened that then my job shifted that the first thing I needed to do was make. Sure that he was safe that I was safe that all the  and the people around were safe that gave me something to do. Yeah and then to to become  a court reporter yeah to be thinking about how. Am I going to describe this to my team later on  the Tantrum started at   and the first thing that he did was. He threw  and I have to tell you guys that helped me to manage the anxiety it helped me to feel capable it. Helped me because I was doing I was  oh the tantrums already happening I dont want to be giving it attention. I have a job  now and Im going to do it because thats going to help us to crack the code on why this is happening. Later on  um and that was super you know in a way it reminded me of an acting exercise. That I remember being a young actor and saying I dont understand  I can. Bring up tears to cry but I dont understand how Im safe during that time yes and an acting teacher taught me you. Know youre in a safe space here and all this other  is happening here yeah and and thats what I started to do. During the Tantrums Im safe hes safe I made sure of that now I can be here and. Notice whats happening yeah and  that I can tell it to somebody later on and that helped me to deal with the. Anxiety of it but I always used to Marvel theres a video that you show sometimes when you speak uh its from. Americas Funniest Home Videos oh yeah and its I love that video  and um. But its a kid who is a baby its  a oneyearold yeah and I love that video its  when I first saw it on. Americas Funniest Home Videos I was  oh my God I will describe it for them but then I want to tell you what. Made me feel yeah  its a baby is in diapers its  a oneyearold whos. Its a toddler is   walking and um I guess Mom or Dad is recording this. Toddler and they want something or  and they throw themselves on the floor and they  screaming and. Crying and the person who has the cameras the parent walks to another room. And then you see the baby the toddler looking. Stopping getting up and going to the room where the parents on the video is. And then throwing themselves again on the floor and starting the Tantrum again and the parent does this four times they. Go to another room and the pet toddler stops goes follows them four times  it. Is such a great example of Im only doing this for your pleasure for you to. See that I need something yes but I think whats interesting about it is that the first time I saw it I was. Oh my gosh because you can hear the parent laughing as theyre videotaping and I thought this is the difference. Between parents of of kids with autism and neurotypical parents because that. Parent knows this is not going to be the rest of the life their life that parent knows this is a tantrum and this is. A phase that theyre going through and its not going to be the rest of our lives this is why and  I talk to. Parents on the Spectrum I say videotape a lot even when you dont want to because youre going to need to go back. And look at what you got through but we dont want to because we think its the rest of our lives  we. Stand there in that moment and think this is never going to end thats  true and I hadnt thought about that. Thats something new that you  taught me   but the other side of it I think Shannon is also. Theres a lot of embarrassment with parents with special needs kids because they feel being judged they feel. Others are judging me at this thats  we are being looked down. Upon yes and we need to stop this the amount of  that goes on in this. Minute  the emotions your emotions its a lot its a lot which is why often. When you say  you know they taught me a stepbystep guide yeah its  important to  to not  judge. Yourself at that moment  or your child but remember that this is behavior. And behavior occurs in all of us in the same way its not about autism at all. And I want to keep repeating that a lot of times people think Tantrums challenging Behavior blah blah blah all. Any challenging Behavior has nothing to do with the diagnosis of autism this is. Important it is not one of the symptoms of autism it is a side effect. Of not being able to communicate now thats super important because a lot of. Times when our kids are diagnosed people will say oh that explains why he has  many tantrums and then it becomes an. Acceptable part of autism its not its not one of the symptoms of autism it is. Any other communication disability where if you cant communicate you will tantrum because. Challenging behaviors are a form of communication theyre a form of I cant. Tell you otherwise whats going on with me  Im going to tantrum which is why. By the way  developing kids they tantrum as  when theyre young as time goes on language replaces that. And thats thats  the key to it that is  critical for us to remember because its its not youre not a bad. Parent yeah  this child did not come out of the womb with an instruction manual sorry I wish I did but they. Didnt yeah and there are techniques that you can learn that will Empower you um but the I I  have an allergic. Reaction when Im someplace with older um children on the spectrum that are. Years old and theyre behaving   inappropriately and the parents  go thats autism and I. I have an allergic reaction to that thats not the ticket but lets get to some of these questions that people have. Written in Parker says heres a question I want to ask its not for me but Im curious about it and I love this. Question Parker for example a kids special interest is PAW Patrol and its all over the Christmas list and the. Age Appropriate Toys. Therapist or another person says he needs a new ageappropriate interest and there was no par Paw Patrol under the. Tree I heard about a similar story with Shannon it was  Nancy that went through that with Thomas the Tank I. Would  to hear that story and how to handle a situation  that Im asking out of curiosity and helping other. People yeah  I always talk about theres you know. There are lots of decisions we have to make when were working with our kids. One decision is do I want to have do I want to give my the child in this. Particular instance something of significant interest that means a powerful reinforcer or do I want them to. Have something ageappropriate and and theres a good reason behind both of those  do I want something thats a. Powerful reinforcer my God theres  a million reasons why we would want a powerful reinforcer    of. The time in ABA were  seeking out those powerful reinforcers because theyre the only thing we have in order. To teach your child if you dont have a powerful reinforcer for a child you cant teach them period because they. Will find other reinforcers  but when you have a powerful reinforcer  that Paw Patrol and you want to teach. Your child something difficult it comes in  useful  handy  thats one reason for that the reason for Asia. Program appropriate is when youre at the point where you want to increase social skills with other children peers. And if youre the work if youre playing with Paw Patrol but youre not playing with something that is more. Ageappropriate your peers will not be attracted to engaging with you and that. Is the only reason  you can have both you can have PAW Patrol as the powerful. Reinforcer but when it comes to Pure interaction youre going to want to have. Some  that are more ageappropriate these  we have to remember the ageappropriate  are. Not reinforcers for that particular child their their work their work and. Thats  because once he has engaged with his peers using the appropriate. Toys he can have a Time on his own plane watching Paw Patrol and thats you know. Its true for a lot of us I was  saw an old friend of mine yesterday and its funny because sometimes when I see. Friends who are my age and weve known each other for a long long time we have. Were  honest and transparent and we talk about how  social socializing. Is doesnt have the same reinforcement value as it did when we were in our s  when youre in your s all you. Want to do is  chill and not do anything  and  social behavior. Which would be the power the pure appropriate play the ageappropriate play is not a reinforcer for us anymore. In fact you kind of force yourself to go out its a its a job oh yeah and after. That you can have your Paw Patrol which is laying in bed and watching  it is you want to watch  you  have. To you have to have both they have different reasons and you figure out which one is appropriate for that time I. I always say I want to  write a book that is uh translating parent to bcba. And bcba to parent um because I feel  everybody gets  black and white about this oh yeah yeah. This is a  good point and thanks for saying that because I have seen a lot of in fact I engage with a lot of. Vcbas who do this and they are  no no no we cant let him play with this because its not ageappropriate they. Forget that it doesnt matter its a reinforcer yeah the  that are. Reinforcers dont have to be age appropriate or in any way appropriate as. Long as theyre reinforcers thats  important and on the parent side we go and we ask the the team and say you know. What kinds of  should I get my child and when they say oh yeah I dont get the PAW Patrol we think that means. No PAW Patrol  whatsoever  whereas I wish Id  to insert myself into the conversation and say what kinds. Of skills would you  your child to be working on heres the the list of toys that would be good for them that. Are ageappropriate and  work with them you know to do that and from the parent side you know that they that they. Could be saying hey you know I I know that the PAW Patrol thing isnt. Ageappropriate but how could we take that and make it more ageappropriate  how could we work towards that. Now theres one Paw Patrol toy thats the Paw Patrol toy but then we have uh. Uh you know a drawing pad where were going to learn how to draw Paw Patrol you can take a lot of   that. Youre  or Thomas the Tank Engine that you know   they were gonna get one Thomas the Tank toy but now. Were also gonna get them a train set thats the ho thats a little bit older or were gonna get them a book about. Trains yes or were going to take them to Travel Town where they have  old trains   and you bring up a. Whole nother point because you pointed out when Nancy was talking about Wyatt and how some of these  that are. Reinforcers I I want to say two other  about  that are powerfully reinforcing one is that they can become. Obsessive yes thats a different issue that is not the issue were talking about here its a different issue they. Dont always have to become obsessive if you can control them but they can become. Obsessive when something becomes obsessive now its part of the behavioral program to get you out of. That Obsession which by the way also doesnt happen forcefully it happens gradually because. When we when we have obsessions theres a reason for those as  theyre not. Oh this is part of the autism no the reason we have  that are obsessive compulsive is because we have. Anxiety and these  give us a sense of control over our environments they. Are familiar there theres something about different  that gives us a sense of control  obsessions as a. Whole have to be taken away gradually or reduced gradually otherwise our anxiety. Will shoot through the roof  thats an important thing to remember but the other part of it Shannon is  you. Know everything  a lot of parents will ask me you know his biggest dream   Ill Ill  with what are. Some reinforcers thats  the  important thing you cannot do any kind of Behavioral you cant do any kind of. Intervention unless you know what are the rewards   what are the reinforcers and parents will have a hard time list testing them yeah and Ill be. What about  an iPad or playing on and theyll say oh yeah he loves the iPad but were not. Allowed to give that to him thats not the case that is whats  important to realize you can give any kind of. Reinforcer as long as it is controlled  its not all day long every day yeah. And as long as its not harmful and the reason I say harmful is because as. Children there are certain  that are harmful for instance sugar sugar as. Adults theres a ton of reinforcers that we sometimes give ourselves that are. Harmful such as alcohol alcohol is a  harmful reinforcer that a lot of. People use such as shopping such as gambling these are all harmful. Reinforcers and we dont want our kids to learn harmful habits  you. With teaching them you can have any reinforcer as long as its not harmful. And its not obsessive it doesnt take up your whole day  and thats it that is the key to it and and you know. Any kind of reinforcer is fine and then you know but but to Parkers point if youve if youve carried it out to. The the nth degree which people do because we we go we want to listen and we dont hear all the Nuance to it and. When people do you know when there is Disappointment because something is not under the tree how do you deal with that. Yeah and I mean disappointment is a different issue the way I would deal. With it is I would make sure there are some  under the tree I agree that are Pleasant for the child I mean. Remember the whole purpose of Christmas or  youre celebrating  is. That youre its a day when you are giving your child free reinforcers. I mean thats what this is about   I would make sure there are  that are interesting because. Realistically putting  under the tree that the child has no interest in is  for a  developing child. Buying them  they dont    why would you do that you know no  uh  uh our cam our. Journey Camerons New Life comments that uh their son throws  and screams thats communication yeah hes telling. You something uh Yasmine says hello my son  years old went upset at school and sometimes home will curse at the. My son gets upset and curses at teachers at school. Teachers or Aid sometimes he will hit and always apologize guys  after they have been trying to teach him what. He can say or do when hes upset he becomes mad when he cant have something or when he has to do something he does. Not want to do once he said to the aid Im going to kill you uh when he was mad. Yeah  theyre not doing a terrific job at it I mean it  they are I dont. Know it  take a little bit longer at school yeah but the the concepts. Behind that is that saying the words and apologizing is not a good plan thats. Not the intervention that should be apologizing to is not going to be. Sufficient and think about that again A lot of times I say that about our own. Typical kids and or adults or adults yeah you know if you went around and. Yelled at people and then said Im  sorry and  kept doing it people would not that would not be  yeah I. Mean there are people that do that thats an abusive relationship  yes    but  what I the point. Here is that  when they  can see it starting to happen. They need to have a million different ways for the child to  say. Im getting angry Im getting upset I think I need to go outside and cool down. Or I think I need a break from this or  it is teach them to go in the. Corner and take a deep breath I mean I always say its good for our kids to have  a bean bag where they can go. And put on some music and calm down remember it is harder for our kids to selfregulate  its hard for some. Of us I mean you know I see myself when I was a child it would take me a while. To cool off whereas Id see lets say another child and they  didnt care  people have different levels of. Ability to down regulate and up regulate  remember that it is harder for our. Kids they become over stimulated overwhelmed with  and  its. Important to catch it before it turns into a cuss word or some sort of yelling. Or something and when they recognize that the child is about to get to that point they teach the child something. That he can say or do to remove himself and then come back and its  not. When if he does it apology is  not enough this is a case where if he does  occurs they. Should be have some sort of token system where a response cost economy is. Occurring  he does something he loses a token which would have otherwise. Gotten him closer to a reinforcer  why I loved when my son went. To Junior High his guidance counselor gave him a card and it was  a get out of jail free card it was  you. Can and his all of his teachers were told if he ever and he said were going to find a place in your backpack where. It lives  you know where it is and if he ever raises this card or says or refers to the card no questions asked he. Gets to come to my office yeah  immediately and my son only used it once. In the two years that he was in junior high but it was   freaking helpful yeah because he had reached a. Point where and and you know before that you guys had taught him how. To recognize when he needed to ask for something but that that spoke the language of his school  you know. Because he could have said I needed a break and you know theres a math teacher who would be  no its not time for a break  you gotta have a. Break  but because that was from the guidance counselor everybody knew no no that we dont mess with that I love. That Megan wrote in and said their tantrum is not our fault amen our. Failure or our failure yeah yeah and its also not theirs I mean and thats  its not theirs either I mean. People theres no question even today  with as  knowledge of autism as. There is people still will judge you when your child screams or cries in a public place who cares  to me its. I dont you I dont care I dont care sorry  bad you know  this is. Im dealing with something here its not their failure its not your failure its their way of communicating which. Unfortunately is not socially appropriate and that  is one of those  interesting key parts of. Why when individuals on the Spectrum say we dont need to be changed I disagree. Because its not  an individual on the Spectrum its anyone who exhibits a. Tantrum in be in social life is going to need to change because tantruming or. Having challenging behaviors amongst others is disruptive to others and no. Matter what our diagnosis or no diagnosis we all learn to become more. Acclimated to that and become more of a social being and  you know thats the. Same thing its nobodys failure its  that theyre taking a little bit longer to learn that this isnt  and. We all have the  to learn Im glad you wrote this question back in because I  have it on this piece of. Paper they wrote it and said good morning my  year old son is  bright has friends hobbies and. Participates in sports our problem is when we are in the car and we get stuck in traffic he has a meltdown of crying. My  Year Old Tantrums Every Time we are in Traffic. Yelling hyperventilating and internalizing the situation hell say what did I do to deserve this it looks. A panic attack we have tried a car bag with books fidgets iPad but he wont. Touch it he will ask over and over to find out how long the wait will be but sometimes we dont have a cell service. Its  he needs information but even if we know even if we know he still. Doesnt settle down what can we do traffic is a part of life and thank you. I dont know why my first instinct is to tell you are you sure that he needs the. Information or do you think it is possible that he is enjoying the attention that you give. Him when he is panicking  question that ask yourself that. Because a lot of times our kids  to interact in a way where now theyre. Getting a lot of parents giving them a way to calm that its  honey its. All   be all  its  fine dont worry itll be this itll be that its a lot of interaction. From you and  thats whats maintaining this Behavior  my first. Question and this can be a little tough but my first question is have you what. Happens if you dont interact at all and you  play some music give him the. Opportunity to put on some headphones or  if he chooses to he can if he chooses not to its up to him but. Carry on a conversation with someone else in the car when you hit. Traffic and see what happens and see if he is able to get control of that. Anxiety some other way than leaning into you having to calm him because youve. Given him a lot of other options but he continues to maintain this one  that. And by the way if it you know its working if it gets worse before it gets. Better thats called an Extinction burst  something gains attention  the function of something is. Attention  a child does something in order to gain attention and we stop the attention that behavior will. Get worse its called an Extinction burst itll get worse and then itll rapidly dissolve and go away and the. Reason it gets worse is because from the childs perspective theyre thinking why isnt anybody telling me how  time. Is left why isnt anybody interacting with me why isnt anybody giving me more attention  now and then theyll be. Im gonna  act up a little bit more to get that attention and and once they do and you still dont. Give the attention theyre  I better figure something else out out here because I need to kind of engage myself. Some other way  that is one possibility is that hes doing it for the attention the other thing is you. Know I mean youve done everything honestly youve given him a way of knowing  hes  years old. You want to  show him a map give him maps on the phone and let. Him see where it turns orange  theres some predictability  he knows were going to be sitting in traffic for a. Little bit and hey isnt this cool we can do all these other  while traffic is happening youve given him a. Lot of good  here I  that youve given him  books fidget. IPads but you know if he chooses not to approach that and he chooses to. Engage with you then that tells me its the attention that hes looking for a little bit yeah he sounds  a kid who. A GPS watch for Christmas that honestly or    teaching him how to understand whats on. The maps app you know because that helps you and he can  look at it himself and see that theres  minutes. Left in fact if you use maps or ways they both tell you how  time and traffic yeah  and I gotta say. Theres a set of uh headphones in the the toy guide that are called leap pod. Max its from LeapFrog I love these headphones because you can use them with a Bluetooth  they can play their own. Music and they theyre kind you know they look  leapfrog and that theyre white and they have green details on. Them theyre kind of cool looking um  you could use them for older kids but  you can listen to anything that you want it but also comes. Preprogrammed with a bunch of meditation  about breathing and. Heres the thing that I love the  about them they are our Factory preset  you cant turn the volume up  hard. That you could hurt your ear yeah which a lot of our kids thats a concern   I think thats a great thing to have. On board in the car before the traffic  instead of waiting for the traffic. That were going to get in the car and were going to be as in as calm of a state as possible  but. Honestly John and I think some of our kids  you know a lot of kids theyre into geography theyre into Maps theyre. Into   traffic  I dont know that in his case its enough to avoid it I. Think in fact   I teach him how to if he wants to know how  more time teach them how to figure that out yeah you know and  you stop talking. About it and you stop trying to calm him I love that but I Do by the way thanks for talking about all these toys because. Every toy youre telling about Im  I want a coffee I want that for my kid and I know I know theyre theyre not. Thats everybody check out the toy guide why we pick them because theyre  good we havent had a chance this year. Because youve been away thats  for you to play with the toys Ill give you a tour of the toys theres some good. Um  uh how to control no reason laughing please guy yeah  you you. Should join us when we do a segment or if we have our dear friend Julie. Matthews or some other nutritionist on the on the show with us because no reason laughing from a behavioral. Help Controlling the No Reason Laugh. Perspective is is one of those tactics where our kids kind of delay  they. Want to delay but more often my experience has been that it is yeast. Related and it has Ive seen that believe me a lot and Ive seen a lot of. Kids  they look drunk they look  their walk around and theyre  giggling they will smell  brandy. Sometimes in their in their mouth or their heads or their feet will smell  fresh baked bread you can smell the. Yeast  you  I would  do a rule out of yeast issues which. Means that youd want to see a functional medicine physician or a. Nutritionist or dietitian and they can help you first of all test for and see if there is excessive yeast thats a. Stool test that you can do and and once you know that then treat the yeast. Because yeast candidiasis in general does tend to be a big issue with a lot. Of our kids fungal infections  that would be  important to do and if its not that the other thing that I. Sometimes see is our kids remember something that theyve seen on a TV show. Or  and with our with  developing kids they also do but the difference is they will say ah I. Remembered blah blah blah and theyll give an introduction to what it is theyre thinking and our kids dont give. That introduction  the first thing is if its  random times and it doesnt. Appear to be  connected to something theyve seen before then I. Would  go for treating the yeast figuring out if it is yeast but if it does appear that oh this shot your child. Often laughs also when they see particular segment and they repeat that segment then it  could be that. Theyre remembering something funny and they  dont know how to say it or introduce that yeah  true I want to. Get to some of these last comments Renee and Elvira said last month I moved to a new city seeking more resources and. Better school we started seeing a Maps doctor good for you and Im  thankful for everything but Im  overwhelmed. How do moms do this Im sending you a hug and telling you that you know we all have had moments where we thought we. Feeling Overwhelmed with New School and Resources in a New City. Couldnt do it yeah for me personally I tried to give myself shortterm reinforcers and longterm reinforcers. Ive said many times before in the show that on my darkest days I would always picture my son standing in front of me. In a cap and gown and that I would be able to say to him we did everything that we could the world is yours now and. I got to do that two years ago I stood with him at graduation and did that now I have different pictures in my head. Yeah that help me to get through  but that wasnt enough I had to have shortterm reinforcers and I would. To check in I had  a yearly thing that we would do and I would think oh my gosh you know were   better than. We were a year ago because because its hard and you have to have you know. Friends and people around you yeah and and people to fill your bucket to to. Inspire you more but its hard its    hard and I want to say. You know for a moment for parents whos who dont get to enjoy the longterm. Reinforced service child doesnt get to graduation I want you to remember that. To  with youre a different category than the parent of the typical. Child and thats important because youre not  you know I think of all. Parents of kids its a hard thing  but some some of us are sitting in the. Village and were dealing with you know making the village a more livable place. And some of us are on the front lines and youre youre the Warriors youre. The people who are were given this task and dont dont mistake your job is. Never going to be as easy as the job of a neurotypical childs parents its. Not its a different job and its a harder job theres no question at least. For now when theyre a child you never know with neurotypical kids I mean you know a lot of parents of neurotypical. Kids deal with   significant issues when their child is a teenager or. Who knows when an illness  attack or  it is we all have those  but your job at least in the. Beginning is a tougher job you are the warrior thats you have been given that. Task and you can do this you are going to get through this there are other parents  you who have you dont have. To be perfect at it you do the best you you can and it  is part of the job. You know what I mean a lot of times I think as parents we get tired and we  want to throw the towel in and you. Can throw the towel in for a day or two but the fact of the matter is and you can get help and  on but I I think. Parents and I always say this because parents are the reason I stay in this field for  many years you are warriors. Youre Warriors thats who you are and the sooner you recognize that the better. Because youre going to continue to be a warrior even if your child recovers youre a warrior  Shannon who will. Now influence other peoples lives in one way or another  put on the warrior hat and itll remind. You that you can do it yes I always  the equation strength over time equals. Power there you go  you dont have to get it perfect today you dont have to do everything today exhibit strength. Over time yep there we go were out of time but I  want to say johani you wrote a great question about. How do we teach different reinforcers Im going to put that at the top of the list for next week and Felix asked how. Can we get a consultation with you Dr Doreen for our son you can write directly to me Shannon at autism. Hyphenlivecom and I will forward that to her assistant Shannon at autism. Hyphenlivecom and Ill afford it dark angel wrote a question about pronunciation that I think is important. And  put that at the top of the list for now  as  you guys youre  youre doing  work. With your kiddos and I  appreciate being its a privilege to be here with you and with all of them thank you. Wonderful being here  next time Shannon on on the show next week which is  I think  before the last. Coming up on Autism Live. Show of the year  we can do something on uh tips to manage the holidays oh lets do that lets pick. That for the topic next week  because its its a coming and I dont know everybody gets  excited and I. Think the reality of it is oh we have less services oh my life is more complicated oh yeah theres a lot of. Sugar and noise and other peoples opinions which are never helpful uh almost never helpful. All    take all of that on next week it will be the last ask Dr Doreen of the year next week. Make sure that you guys tune in for that I want to  tell you that tomorrow on the show weve got some exciting guests. For you and dont forget that on Thursday we have lets talk all the  with Rachel bird and youre not. Going to want to miss that because we have a craft planned and shes  good at crafting Island epic fail  you. Wont want to to miss that   exciting  dont miss that and dont forget to register for your tickets for. Sensitive Santa if youre in the Los Angeles area all   see you guys tomorrow and until then give your. Kiddos a hug from me and one for you  I dont know why I was  waiting for you to say that but. You never say that I say that Id love you. Never mind for you   see you tomorrow. Dont forget you can watch ask Dr Doreen live every Tuesday morning at  AM. Pacific time we hope to see you there.
